Quantum Mechanics is the way the universe works. But often its effects are washed out unless we look at very small scales. Or very cold temperatures.
Much recent progress has been in understanding how quantum mechanics affects macroscopic numbers of atoms.
Electrons are elementary particles. They have no constituent parts. Yet we frequently perform experiments where they split up!
Quantum Mechanics is a framework rather than a theory .
For example, suppose you’re given Coulomb’s law, describing how electric charges experience a force.
You can either choose to think in the classical framework, or you could choose to think in the quantum framework, which means that you plug this into Schrodinger’s equation.
It’s like running a programme on different operating systems, and the operating system of the universe is quantum mechanics
Consider the electron orbiting the proton.
The classical problem is exactly the same as a planet orbiting the sun.
The orbits are ellipses, with the sun (or proton) at one focus.
But there’s no restriction on the size or eccentricity of the orbit that depends only on initial conditions of the problem
The question of the distances between the planets used to be the biggest open problem in science. But we now know that it’s a complicated question that isn’t answered by the fundamental theory.
In quantum mechanics the answer is very different
The electron can only sit in very particular orbits.
Yet, in each of these orbits, its position is undetermined. It is smeared out, a wave of probability.
The mathematical framework of quantum mechanics was covered in Vectors and Matrices, with more in next year’s Linear Algebra.
However, this may not be apparent when taking your first Quantum Mechanics course next year, where Differential Equations will appear more important.
The Principle of Superposition
The state of a system consists of all the information that’s required to determine the state of the system at all times in the future
In Classical Mechanics, the state of a system is by given the positions and momenta of all the particles.
 The Principle of Superposition
In quantum mechanics, the state lives in a vector space. This means that we are allowed to add and subtract states something which makes no sense in classical mechanics.
The vector is called the wavefunction. It is typically a vector in an infinite dimensional vector space, known as a Hilbert space.
While the state of the system is a vector, the measurements that we do on a system are matrices. We have a different matrix for each type of measurement: e.g. position, momentum, energy
The possible outcomes of a measurement are the eigenvalues of the matrix.
matrix
For example: if H is the matrix representing a measurement of energy, then the eigenvalues E are the possible outcomes of that measurement
When H is energy, this is known as the Schrodinger Equation.
What happens if our state  is not an eigenvector of the matrix we are measuring?
Then the measurement could give any one of the eigenvalues Ei . Each occurs with some probability
We expand our state in a basis of eigenvectors of H.
Then the probability of the measurement giving Ei is
Most matrices have different eigenvectors. This means that if the state is in an eigenvector of one matrix, it is unlikely to be in an eigenvector of a different matrix.
So if one type of measurement is certain, another type becomes uncertain.
This is Heisenberg’s Uncertainty Principle. If we know, say, the position of the particle then it’s momentum becomes uncertain. And vice versa.
Entanglement
To end, let’s look at one of the more bewildering aspects of quantum mechanics. It is the fact that strange correlations can exist between experiments. This subject is usually called entanglement.
Entanglement
This subject has a venerable history
Einstein, Podolsky and Rosen, 1935, tried to use it to disprove quantum mechanics. The argument was roughly: entanglement is so ridiculous that it can’t possibly be right.
Bell, 1964 showed that one could test through experiment whether entanglement actually occurs.
Aspect et. al. 1982 did the experiment.
Punchline: the universe is a much stranger place than you imagined!
I’ll tell you about a result from 1990 by Greenberger, Horne and Zeilinger known as
GHZ correlations.
Three scientists are each sitting in a lab, separated in spacetime.
Every minute, they receive a package sent from a mysterious central station. They are told what they have to do.
They could be elementary particles or the whole thing could just be a hoax with the machine flashing up +1/-1 at random
Each measurement is recorded until each scientist has a list that looks like this but with a bazillion entries.
Now the scientists get together and start looking for correlations in the measurements. They notice the following.
This means the first person measured X, while the second and third people measured Y
But this gives a prediction .whenever all three scientists measured X, the results multiplied together must give +1

This is so simple, it couldn’t even be called a law of physics. It follows from our most basic ideas about how the universe works.
The things measured were the polarization of photons. (Spins of elementary particles would work just as well). The results are
The very basic (classical) intuition for how the universe works is wrong!
An implicit assumption is that the measurements are performed independently, so that experiment 2 has no way of knowing whether the switch on experiment 1 is set to X or Y.
But we can guarantee that this is true, by placing the scientists at space-like separated points.
It appears that these correlations require information to be transmitted faster than light!
The resolution to the paradox is that we assumed the packages leaving the central station had definite assignments
But in the quantum world, we cannot give definite assignments to all possible measurements. The package that arrived didn’t have both X and Y assigned at the same time.
The GHZ correlations are almost nonlocal. In a classical world, the only way you could get such correlations is by non-locality, which implies transmission of information faster than the speed of light.
But our world is quantum. And such correlations are allowed without faster-than-light communication.
What were they measuring?
They were measuring spins of particles.
The state that the central station was sending is neither an eigenvector of X nor Y.
